President John F. Kennedy San Antonio, Texas November 21, 1963, Remarks of the President at the Dedication of the Aerospace Medical Health Center at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.
Mr. Secretary, Governor, Mr. Vice President, Senator, Members of the Congress, members of the military, ladies and gentlemen:
For more than 3 years I have spoken about the New Frontier.
This is not a partisan term, and it is not the exclusive property of Republicans or Democrats.
It refers, instead, to this Nation's place in history, to the fact that we do stand on the edge of a great new era, filled with both crisis and opportunity,
an era to be characterized by achievement and by challenge.
It is an era which calls for action and for the best efforts of all those who would test the unknown and the uncertain in every phase of human endeavor.
It is a time for pathfinders and pioneers.
I have come to Texas today to salute an outstanding group of pioneers, the men who man the Brooks Air Force Base School of Aerospace Medicine and the Aerospace Medical Center.
It is fitting that San Antonio should be the site of this center and this school as we gather to dedicate this complex of buildings.
For this city has long been the home of the pioneers in the air.
It was here that Sidney Brooks, whose memory we honor today, was born and raised.
It was here that Charles Lindbergh and Claire Chennault, and a host of others, who, in World War I and World War II and Korea, and even today have helped demonstrate American mastery of the skies,
trained at Kelly Field and Randolph Field, which form a major part of aviation history.
And in the new frontier of outer space, while headlines may be made by others in other places, history is being made every day by the men and women of the Aerospace Medical Center,
without whom there could be no history.
Many Americans make the mistake of assuming that space research has no values here on earth.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Just as the wartime development of radar gave us the transistor, and all that it made possible,
so research in space medicine holds the promise of substantial benefit for those of us who are earthbound.
For our effort in space is not as some have suggested, a competitor for the natural resources that we need to develop the earth.
It is a working partner and a coproducer of these resources.
And nothing makes this clearer than the fact that medicine in space is going to make our lives healthier and happier here on earth.
I give you three examples: first, medical space research may open up new understanding of man's relation to his environment.
Examinations of the astronaut's physical, and mental, and emotional reactions can teach us more about the differences between normal and abnormal, about the causes and effects of disorientation,
about changes in metabolism which could result in extending the life span.
When you study the effects on our astronauts of exhaust gases which can contaminate their environment, and you seek ways to alter these gases so as to reduce their toxicity,
you are working on problems similar to those in our great urban centers which themselves are being corrupted by gases and which must be clear.
And second, medical space research may revolutionize the technology and the techniques of modern medicine.
Whatever new devices are created, for example, to monitor our astronauts, to measure their heart activity, their breathing, their brain waves, their eye motion,
at great distances and under difficult conditions, will also represent a major advance in general medical instrumentation.
Heart patients may even be able to wear a light monitor which will sound a warning if their activity exceeds certain limits.
An instrument recently developed to record automatically the impact of acceleration upon an astronaut's eyes will also be of help to small children who are suffering miserably from eye defects,
but are unable to describe their impairment .
And also by the use of instruments similar to those used in Project Mercury, this Nation's private as well as public nursing services are being improved,
enabling one nurse now to give more critically ill patients greater attention than they ever could in the past.
And third, medical space research may lead to new safeguards against hazards common to many environments.
Specifically,
our astronauts will need fundamentally new devices to protect them from the ill effects of radiation which can have a profound influence upon medicine and man's relations to our present environment.
Here at this center we have the laboratories, the talent, the resources to give new impetus to vital research in the life centers.
I am not suggesting that the entire space program is justified alone by what is done in medicine.
The space program stands on its own as a contribution to national strength.
And last Saturday at Cape Canaveral I saw our new Saturn C-1 rocket booster, which, with its payload, when it rises in December of this year, will be, for the first time,
the largest booster in the world, carrying into space the largest payload that any country in the world has ever sent into space.
I think the United States should be a leader.
A country as rich and powerful as this which bears so many burdens and responsibilities, which has so many opportunities, should be second to none.
And in December, while I do not regard our mastery of space as anywhere near complete, 
while I recognize that there are still areas where we are behind-at least in one area, 
the size of the booster-this year I hope the United States will be ahead.
And I am for it.
We have a long way to go.
Many weeks and months and years of long, tedious work lie ahead.
There will be setbacks and frustrations and disappointments.
There will be, as there always are, pressures in this country to do less in this area as in so many others, and temptations to do something else that is perhaps easier.
But this research here must go on.
This space effort must go on.
The conquest of space must and will go ahead.
That much we know.
That much we can say with confidence and conviction.
Frank O'Connor, the Irish writer, tells in one of his books how, as a boy, he and his friends would make their way across the countryside,
and when they came to an orchard wall that seemed too high and too doubtful to try and too difficult to permit their voyage to continue,
they took off their hats and tossed them over the wall-and then they had no choice but to follow them.
This Nation has tossed its cap over the wall of space, and we have no choice but to follow it.
Whatever the difficulties, they will be overcome.
Whatever the hazards, they must be guarded against.
With the vital help of this Aerospace Medical Center, with the help of all those who labor in the space endeavor, with the help and support of all Americans,
we will climb this wall with safety and with speed-and we shall then explore the wonders on the other side.
Thank you.


President John F. Kennedy Houston, Texas November 21, 1963 Remarks of the President at the testimonial dinner.
In honour of Albert Thomas, from the Sam Coliseum in Houston, Texas.
November 21, 1963.
Congressman and Mrs. Thomas, Mr. Vice President, Governor Connally, Senator Yarborough, Congressman Casey and the congressional delegation of Texas,
ladies and gentlemen:
When I came to the House of Representatives in 1947 as a fairly young Congressman from Massachusetts,
I heard the old saying that you spend the first 6 months in the House of Representatives wondering how you got there, and the next 6 months wondering how everybody else got there!
I spent the first 6 months as expected, but I must say that I never wondered how Congressman Thomas got there.
It has always been clear to me. When I read the report that Congressman Thomas was thinking of resigning, I called him up on the phone and asked him to stay as long as I stayed.
I didn't know how long that would be, but I wanted him to stay because I thought that he not only represented this district with distinction, but also he served the United States.
The Presidency has been called a good many names, and Presidents have been also, but no President can do anything without the help of friends.
And I must say in the 3 years that I have been in this office, the 3 years really since I was here in Houston that night in this hall,
I don't know anyone who has been a greater help in trying to get the job done, not just for Houston and not just for Texas , but for the entire United States, than Albert Thomas,
and I am glad to be with his friends here tonight.
He may not be so well known outside of this district in Texas and Washington, but I can tell you that when he rises to speak in the House of Representitives, they listen, so do some Senators,
and so do we at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue.
He has one of the longest records of seniority in the Senate, in the House and one of the shortest biographies.
He has been consistently loyal, to his party but he has always stayed above partisan rankor.
His record serves his constituants, but it serves the United States.
He has help steer this country to its present eminenence in space.
Next month when the United States of America fires the largest booster in the history of the world into space for the first time, giving us the lead, fires the largest payrole,
payload, into space giving us the lead - it will be the largest payroll too.
And ah, and who should know that better than Houston?
(And put a little bit of that right in here.)
In any case, United States next month will have a leadership in space, which you wouldn't have without Albert Thomas and so will this city.
He's been a stickler for efficiency in government, but he's also been for progress and growth.
He is 65 years of age this month, but he has a young mans interest in the future and a young mans hope for his country.
For he's lived with change and he has sought to channel its force, instead of combatting it.
He understands as any Texan does, the meaning and importance of growth.
For he has served one of the fastest growing countries and states and cities in the nation.
And those who oppose progress should look at Houston and look at Texas.
When he went to the United States Congress in 1936, some 27 years ago this month, this city had less than 200,000 people.
But Albert Thomas had a vision of a modern Houston which now has a 1,000,000 people and is growing stronger every day.
He was not satisfied nor the people of this city, with a channel that carried less than 30,000,000 million tons a year.
He forsore that this city, despite the fact that it is located 50 miles from the sea and I come from a city that is on the sea and yet this city today ships second, to the city of New York,
around the world and that is in part because of Albert Thomas.
And he and you are not content with an airport serving a handful of passengers, and an industry of less than 300 planes, carrying passengers of less than half a billion revenue miles.
He forsore that, that industry would provide 6 times as many planes, employ 19 times as many people and serve more than 33 billion passenger miles a year.
Here in Houston the number of passengers who go through your great international airport have quadrupled in the last 15 years.
This city has looked forward, with hope and commitment and those who say no in Houston or Texas or in the United States are on the wrong side of 1963.
Finally, when Congressman Thomas went to the House of Representitives in 1936, he did not confine his sight to a Texas of less than 6 million people.
A Texas doing less than 500 million dollars of manufacturing.
A Texas in which 37 percent of its population lived on the farm.
By 1963 that population had dropped to 7 percent.
The population of this state exceeds 10 million.
The value of your manufacturing has climbed to 6 billion.
And Texas today, is one of the most highly industrialised states in the Union.
Many of the products and employers of this city and state were wholly unknown, when Albert Thomas went to the House.
Electronic machinary, sophisticated instruments, in preparation for the exploration of space.
But those are the industries which helped this state reach its highest peak of prosperity in 1962 except for one year, 1963.
In Texas and the nation, change has been the lore of life.
Growth has meant new opportunities for this state.
Progress has meant new achievements and men such as Albert Thomas, who recognise the value of growth and progress, have enabled this city and this state to ride with the tides of change,
instead of being swept aside and left behind.
There were in 1936, as there are today, those who are opposed to growth and change.
Who prefer to defy them and look back instead of forward.
But Albert Thomas and those who worked with him did not heed that view in the mid-thirties, and this city, this State, and this country are glad they did not.
And we dare not look back now, if 27 years from now, in the year 1990 a new generation of Americans is to say that we, too, looked forward.
In 1990 for example, this Nation will need 3 times as much electric power as it has today, 4 times as much water.
And that is why we are developing the Canadian River and the San Angelo, and the Columbus Bend, and other Texas river projects and seeking at Freeport to fund an economical way,
to get fresh water from salt, and building anti-pollution plants throughout this State and Nation, in a new and expanded program.
In 1990, the need for national and State parks and recreation areas will triple, reaching a total very nearly the size of Indiana.
That is why we are creating Padre Island Seashore, and added (the Andahuac Wildlife) Refuge.
In 1990 your sons, daughters, grandsons and grandchildren, will be applying to the colleges of this State in a number three times what they do today.
Our airports will serve 5 times as many passenger miles.
We wil need housing for a hundred million more people, and many times more Doctors and Engineers and Technicians than we are presently producing.
That is why we are trying to do more in these areas, as in the Thirties.
Albert Thomas and Franklin Roosevelt and others did those things which make it possible for not only Texas but the entire United States to prosper and grow, as we do in the 1960's.
In 1990 the age of space will be entereing its second phase, and our hopes in it to preserve the peace, to make sure that in this great new sea, as on earth, the United States is second to none.
And that is why I salute Albert Thomas, and those Texans whom you sent to Washington, in his time and since then,
who recognise the needs and the trends today in the 60's so that when some meet here in 1990 they will look back on what we did and say that we made the right and wise decisions.
"Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions," the Bible tells us, and "where there is no vision, the people perish."
Albert Thomas is old dream dreams, and young enough to see visions.
He sees an America of the future, in the lifetime of us all, with 300 million people living in this country with a $2 trillion enconomy which will happen in this century.
Even more important, he sees an America, as do we all, strong in science and in space, in health and in learning,
in the respect of its neighbours and all nations - an America that is both powerful and peaceful, with a people that are both prosperous and just.
With that vision, we shall not perish, and we cannot fail.
Behind the Speaker's desk in the House of Represtatives there are words from a great speech, by a great citizen of my State, Senator Daniel Webster.
It says, "Let us develop the resources of our land, call forth its industry, develop its resources,
and see whether we also in our time and generation may not perform something worthy to be remembered."
Albert Thomas didn't need to read those words. He has performed something worthy to be remembered.
Thank you.

