Remarks of the President at the testimonial dinner. In honour of Albert Thomas, from the Sam Coliseum in Houston, Texas. November 21, 1963.
Congressman and Mrs. Thomas, Mr. Vice President, Governor Connally, Senator Yarborough, Congressman Casey and the congressional delegation of Texas, ladies and gentlemen:

When I came to the House of Representatives in 1947 as a fairly young Congressman from Massachusetts, I heard the old saying that you spend the first 6 months in the House of Representatives wondering how you got there, and the next 6 months wondering how everybody else got there!

I spent the first 6 months as expected, but I must say that I never wondered how Congressman Thomas got there. It has always been clear to me. When I read the report that Congressman Thomas was thinking of resigning, I called him up on the phone and asked him to stay as long as I stayed. I didn't know how long that would be, but I wanted him to stay because I thought that he not only represented this district with distinction, but also he served the United States.

The Presidency has been called a good many names, and Presidents have been also, but no President can do anything without the help of friends. And I must say in the 3 years that I have been in this office, the 3 years really since I was here in Houston that night in this hall, I don't know anyone who has been a greater help in trying to get the job done, not just for Houston and not just for Texas, but for the entire United States, than Albert Thomas, and I am glad to be with his friends here tonight. He may not be so well known outside of this district in Texas and Washington, but I can tell you that when he rises to speak in the House of Representitives, they listen, so do some Senators, and so do we at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue.

He has one of the longest records of seniority in the Senate, in the House and one of the shortest biographies. He has been consistently loyal, to his party but he has always stayed above partisan rankor. His record serves his constituants, but it serves the United States. He has help steer this country to its present eminenence in space. Next month when the United States of America fires the largest booster in the history of the world into space for the first time, giving us the lead, fires the largest payrole, payload, into space giving us the lead - it will be the largest payroll too. And ah, and who should know that better than Houston? (And put a little bit of that right in here.)

In any case, United States next month will have a leadership in space, which you wouldn't have without Albert Thomas and so will this city. He's been a stickler for efficiency in government, but he's also been for progress and growth. He is 65 years of age this month, but he has a young mans interest in the future and a young mans hope for his country.  For he's lived with change and he has sought to channel its force,  instead of combatting it. He understands as any Texan does, the meaning and importance of growth. For he has served one of the fastest growing countries and states and cities in the nation. And those who oppose progress should look at Houston and look at Texas. 

When he went to the United States Congress in 1936, some 27 years ago this month, this city had less than 200,000 people. But Albert Thomas had a vision of a modern Houston which now has a 1,000,000 people and is growing stronger every day. He was not satisfied nor the people of this city, with a channel that carried less than 30,000,000 million tons a year. He forsore that this city, despite the fact that it is located 50 miles from the sea and I come from a city that is on the sea and yet this city today ships second, to the city of New York, around the world and that is in part because of Albert Thomas.

And he and you are not content with an airport serving a handful of passengers and an industry of less than 300 planes, carrying
passengers of less than half a billion revenue miles. He forsore that, that industry would provide 6 times as many planes, employ
19 times as many people and serve more than 33 billion passenger miles a year. Here in Houston the number of passengers who go 
through your great international airport have quadrupled in the last 15 years. This city has looked forward with hope and commitment
and those who say no in Houston or Texas or in the United States are on the wrong side of 1963.

Finally when Congressman Thomas went to the House of Representitives in 1936 he did not confine his sight to a Texas of less than
6 million people, a Texas doing less than 500 million dollars of manufacturing. A Texas in which 37 percent of its population lived 
on the farm. By 1963 that population had dropped to 7 percent. The population of this state exceeds 10 million. The value of your 
manufacturing climed to 6 billion. And Texas today is one of the most highly industrialised states in the Union. Many of the products
and employers of this city and state were wholly unknown, when Albert Thomas went to the house. Electronic machinary, sophisticated
instruments in preparation for the exploration of space. But those are the industries which helped this state reach its highest peak
of prosperity in 1962 except for one year, 1963. 

In Texas and the nation change has been the lore of life. Growth has meant new opportunities for this state. Progress has meant new
achievements and men such as Albert Thomas who recognise the value of growth and progress have enabled this city and this state 
to ride with the tides of change instead of being swept aside and left behind. There were in 1936 as there are today those who are
opposed to growth and change who prefer to defy them and look back instead of forward. But Albert Thomas and those who worked with 
him did not heed that view in the mid-thirties, and this city, this State, and this country are glad they did not. And we dare not look
back now, if 27 years from now, in the year 1990 a new generation of Americans is to say that we, too, looked forward. 

In 1990 for example, this Nation will need 3 times as much electric power as it has today, 4 times as much water. And that is why we are 
developing the Canadian River and the San Angelo, and the Columbus Bend, and other Texas river projects and seeking at Freeport to fund an 
economical way to get fresh water from salt, and building anti-pollution plants throughout this State and Nation, in a new and expanded program.
In 1990 the need for national and State parks and recreation areas will triple, reaching a total very nearly the size of Indiana. That is why we
are creating Padre Island Seashore, and added the Andahuac Wildlife Refuge.

In 1990 your sons, daughters, grandsons and grandchildren will be applying to the colleges of this State in a number three times what they do today.
Our airports will serve 5 times as many passenger miles. We wil need housing for a hundred million more people, and many times more doctors and 
engineers and technicians than we are presently producing. That is why we are trying to do more in these area, as in the Thirties. Albert Thomas
and Franklin Roosevelt and others did those things which make it possible for not only Texas but the entire United States to prosper and grow, as
we do in the 1960's.

In 1990 the age of space will be entereing its second phase, and our hopes in it to preserve the peace, to make sure that in this great new sea, as on 
earth, the United States is second to none. And that is why I salute Albert Thomas and those Texans whom you sent to Washington in his time and since then,
who recognise the needs and the trends today in the 60's so that when some meet here in 1990 they will look back on what we did and say that we made the right
and wise decisions.

"Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions," the Bible tells us, and "where there is no vision, the people perish." Albert Thomas is old
dream dreams, and young enough to see visions. He sees an America of the future, in the lifetime of us all, with 300 million people living in this country with 
a $2 trillion enconomy which will happen in this century. Even more important, he sees an America, as do we all, strong in science and in space, in health and
in learning, in the respect of its neighbours and all nations - an America that is both powerful and peaceful, with a people that are both prosperous and just.
With that vision we shall not perish, and we cannot fail.

Behind the Speaker's desk in the House of Represtatives there are words from a great speech by a great citizen of my State, Senator Daniel Webster. 
It says, "Let us develop the resources of our land, call forth its industry, develop its resources, and see whether we also in our time and generation
may not perform something worthy to be remembered."

Albert Thomas didn't need to read those words. He performed something worthy to be remembered. 

Thank you.

